docs(blog): wow analysis blog post (#8441)
ibis-project/ibis: docs/posts/wow-analysis/index.qmd

---

> title: "Analsis of World of Warcraft Data"

Reviewer: ```suggestion
title: "Analysis of World of Warcraft Data"
```

Author: This is addressed in the new commit, thank you! Can't believe I missed that one.

author: "Tyler White"
error: false
date: "2024-02-29"
categories:
  - blog
  - data engineering
  - duckdb
---
## Introduction

> This dataset has been around for a while, but it’s newer to me. I grew up playing video games, and I always had a great time jumping into Azeroth and whatever world was introduced in later expansions with my friends.

Reviewer: Can you wrap lines? We've got a docs style guide here: https://ibis-project.org/contribute/03_style#documentation-blog-and-other-prose-style

This data was captured by a Horde player throughout 2008, between the release of the Burning Crusade and Wrath of the Lich King expansions. On November 13, 2008, we will see many characters navigating new areas and exceeding the previous max level of 70.

Let’s grab the data and try to answer a few questions.

## Analysis

We’ll determine who logged in the most and who leveled from 70 to 80 the fastest. Also, what types of activities were those players engaging in? Let's get to work.

### Getting Started

> Ibis ships with an examples module, and this specific data is included. I’ll use DuckDB here, but this is certainly possible with other backends, and I encourage you to experiment. DuckDB is the default Ibis backend, so it’ll be easy to use with this example.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Ibis ships with an `examples` module, and this specific data is included. I’ll use DuckDB here, but this is certainly possible with other backends, and I encourage you to experiment. DuckDB is the default Ibis backend, so it’ll be easy to use with this example.
```

> You can execute pip install `ibis-framework[duckdb,examples]` to work with Ibis and the example. You can also throw “jupyter” in to work in IPython or a notebook interface.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can execute `pip install ibis-framework[duckdb,examples]` to work with Ibis and the example data.
```

Mentioning jupyter here like this suggests that `pip install ibis-framework[duckdb,examples,jupyter]` is a thing and since it's not I think that will confuse readers.

Author: I removed the "jupyter" part to make it clearer.

```{python}
from ibis.interactive import *

wowah_data = ex.wowah_data_raw.fetch()

wowah_data
```

### Getting Table Info

> I want to learn more about these fields. Are there any nulls we should consider? We can use the info method on our Ibis expression.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
I want to learn more about these fields. Are there any nulls we should consider? We can use the [`info`](../reference/expression-tables.qmd#ibis.expr.types.relations.Table.info) method on our Ibis expression.
```

This will create a link to the API docs for the `info` method.

```{python}
wowah_data.info()
```

> We can also use `value_counts` on specific columns if we want to learn more.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We can also use [`value_counts`](../reference/expression-generic.qmd#ibis.expr.types.generic.Column.value_counts) on specific columns if we want to learn more.
```

```{python}
wowah_data.race.value_counts()
```

We don’t have any missing values, and the data `value_count` results match what I would expect. How about duplicates?

```{python}
wowah_data.mutate(
    row_num=ibis.row_number().over(

>         ibis.window(group_by=wowah_data.columns, order_by=wowah_data.timestamp)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
        ibis.window(group_by=wowah_data.columns, order_by="timestamp")
```

For brevity, but totally up to you.

Reviewer: Another way to do this comparison would be to compare

```python
wowah_data.nunique()
```

with

```python
wowah_data.count()
```

Author: Good catch; I don't refer to the full expr variable name anywhere except to get the columns. I will replace with the `_.timestamp` syntax, so it matches the rest of the code snippets.

    .select(_.char, _.level, _.timestamp)
)

wowah_data_filtered
```

```{python}
level_calc = (
    wowah_data_filtered.group_by(["char"])
    .mutate(
        ts_70=_.timestamp.max(where=_.level == 70),
        ts_80=_.timestamp.min(where=_.level == 80),
    )
    .drop(["level", "timestamp"])
    .distinct()
    .mutate(days_from_70_to_80=(_.ts_80.delta(_.ts_70, "day")))
    .order_by(_.days_from_70_to_80)
)

level_calc
```
The data is filtered and grouped by character, and two new columns are created to represent timestamps for levels 70 and 80. The data is then cleaned, and a new column is created to calculate the time taken to level from 70 to 80. Finally, the dataset is sorted by this column.

This isn’t perfect, as I found a case where there was a player who seemed to have quit in March and then returned for the new expansion. They hit 71 before it looks like their login at 70 was captured later. If you’re curious, take a look at **char=21951** for yourself.

### How did they level?

Let’s grab all the details from the previous result and join it back to get the timestamp and zone data.

```{python}
leveler_zones = (
    level_calc.join(wowah_data, "char", how="inner")

>     .filter((_.timestamp >= _.ts_70) & (_.timestamp <= _.ts_80))

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    .filter(_.timestamp.between(_.ts_70, _.ts_80 >= _.ts_70))
```

If you want, up to you.

Author: Thank you for this! I prefer the `between`.

    .group_by([_.char, _.zone])
    .agg(zone_count=_.zone.count())
)
```

This code summarizes how often those characters appear in different zones while leveling up from level 70 to 80. It combines two sets of data based on character names, selects records within the leveling timeframe, groups data by character and zone, and counts the number of times each character was found in each zone.

There is another example table we can join to figure out the Zone information. I’m only interested in two columns, so I’ll filter this further and rename the columns.

```{python}
zones = ex.wowah_zones_raw.fetch()
zones = zones.select(zone=_.Zone, zone_type=_.Type)
zones
```

Making use of `pivot_wider` and joining back to our `leveler_zones` expression will make this a breeze!

```{python}
zones_pivot = (
    leveler_zones.join(zones, "zone")
    .group_by([_.char, _.zone_type])
    .agg(zone_type_count=_.zone.count())

>     .pivot_wider(names_from="zone_type", values_from="zone_type_count")

Reviewer: Nice use of `pivot_wider`!

)

zones_pivot
```

## Conclusion

Doing complicated analysis tasks with Ibis is pretty straightforward. I find that Ibis makes data preparation much easier, especially when trying to apply bulk operations. Breaking things down into steps with these deferred engines makes things much more manageable.

> What other questions could we ask of this data?

Reviewer: Usually we have a lightweight CTA here (join Zulip, report bug, request features etc), e.g., https://ibis-project.org/posts/duckdb-for-rag/#next-steps.

Up to you! Maybe something like `Get in touch on GitHub, we'd love to see more analyses of this data set`?

Author: That is a much better CTA! I will change it to this.

```
## Next Steps

Get in touch with us on [GitHub](https://github.com/ibis-project) or 
[Zulip](https://ibis-project.zulipchat.com/), we'd love to see more analyses of this 
data set. 
```

---

> title: "Analsis of World of Warcraft Data"

Reviewer: ```suggestion
title: "Analysis of World of Warcraft Data"
```

I think this may have gotten clobbered in a subsequent push!

Author: Thank you! Just fixed, hopefully for the last time on this specific typo haha.

it seems like a perfect time to analyze some in-game data!

This dataset is the product of a Horde player's diligent recording throughout 2008,
capturing the transitional phase between the Burning Crusade and Wrath of the Lich King
expansions. Notably, starting November 13, 2008, the data showcases numerous characters
venturing into new territories and advancing beyond the former level cap of 70.

## Analysis

We'll determine who logged in the most, who leveled from 70 to 80 the fastest, and
what activities these players engaged with based on zones. Let's get to work.

### Getting Started

Ibis ships with an `examples` module, which includes this specific data. We'll use DuckDB
here, but this is possible with other backends, and we encourage you to experiment.
DuckDB is the default Ibis backend, so it'll be easy to use with this example.

You can execute `pip install ibis-framework[duckdb,examples]` to work with Ibis and the
example data.

```{python}
from ibis.interactive import *

wowah_data = ex.wowah_data_raw.fetch()

wowah_data
```

### Getting Table Info

Let's learn more about these fields. Are there any nulls we should consider? We can

> use the [`info`](../reference/expression-tables.qmd#ibis.expr.types.relations.Table.info)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
use the [`info`](../../reference/expression-tables.qmd#ibis.expr.types.relations.Table.info)
```

I think these need one more level up!

method on our Ibis expression.

```{python}
wowah_data.info()
```

> We can also use [`value_counts`](../reference/expression-generic.qmd#ibis.expr.types.generic.Column.value_counts)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We can also use [`value_counts`](../../reference/expression-generic.qmd#ibis.expr.types.generic.Column.value_counts)
```
